An Analysis of County Crime Rates 
Vs
Household Income and Police Data 
By Benjamin Sweetnam 


I started this project wanting to compare household income to crime rates in my hometown of Joliet IL to another city, Naperville IL. I wanted to see if there was a correlation between the two factors. I knew that Joliet was a very poor neighborhood and I knew the opposite was true about Naperville. But I wasn't done there, I wanted to compare the crime rates to the number of active police officers in each city. I thought that there might be a stronger correlation between police data and crime data because I have a feeling that crime is universal, and it is being committed everywhere equally (mind you this was my own personal opinion based on my past experiences.) I was then going to compare my finding with Boulders data and see if it was just a regional bias. 


When exploring my data sources, I found a boatload of information through government databases, but unfortunately after using the FBIs Crime Data API and spending days trying to get it to return any valid response and thinking it was because I wasn't using it properly, I found out that Illinois police departments don't submit their crime information to this database. My assumption is that the statistics were scaring people away and that instead of trying to fix the problem, they would just conceal the data instead (in a classic Chicago manner). Once I had figured this out I had to shift my focus towards another regen, and what better place to study than boulder county and compare it to Arapahoe County? The reason I chose these locations is that I know that there is incomprehensible wealth here in Boulder, and we see it every day, and by comparison, from visiting Arapahoe County, we can see that it is more of a working-class area. After a lot of research, I found my sources to be the FBIs Crime Data API in order to retrieve crime statistics, The United States Census Bureau for retrieving financial data, and the Criminal Justice Information Services Data Archives in order to see the number of officers who were employed in each county.  Being that there is so much information available, I decided to focus on one year so the information would be palatable. The year I chose to focus on was 2019, this is because it has been enough time for all parties involved to submit their information, it is relevant, and the Data wouldn't be skewed by the events that followed the COVID-19 pandemic. 


First, I thought I would try to get the total crime count through the FBIs Crime Data API. there were two major elements to this, the first was retrieving all of the department data for the whole state. This gave me the department names, county, location/region, and more importantly the department's “ori” number all in the form of a dictionary. The “ori” number is a unique identification number for each department and I would need to collect these in order to get specific data on each department. So I created two lists and created a function that would iterate through this massive list of departments and those that had a county name equal to Boulder or Arapahoe, and it would add the oris to the list. Then saw that it was returning a detailed dictionary stating how many arrests were made and what crime they were arrested for in the year 2019. This is valuable information, but for the sake of my sanity, I was just focusing on the total number of arrests. There wasn't a “total arrests” result so I had to go in and create a for loop to go through each dictionary and add up all of the crimes for that specific department. In order to do this I had to make a new query that would pull department-specific information. I then used that crime counter in another loop that would go through all of the departments in each county so I could add up the total crimes in each county. And last I got the total number of residents for each county and got the number of arrests per 1,000 residents. 


The second part of my project would be to compare household incomes for each county and see if there was any noticeable difference between the two counties. For this, I used the US Census Burau and downloaded my sources as CSV files, one for each county. After reading the panda's data frame, I saw that there was only one column I wanted from each, and that would be the percentage of the population that fell into each income tax bracket, labeled Colorado Housing Estimates. Each CSV file had the same indexes, so I took the results from both data frames and merged them into one, and set it to the same index, this way we can see a direct comparison of the income profiles of each county. I then stripped away some rows I found irrelevant. This is where I decided I would attempt to use Seaborn to create bar charts of each and get a visual aid to add to my analysis. After beating my head against this for a few days, I finally got a result I was happy with, with the tax bracket as the x-axis and the percent of the population in the said bracket as the y-axis. It wasn't until far too late that I realized that the y-axis values were out of order. I found out that this was because Seaborn wasn't compatible with the format of my data frame, so I re-downloaded a transposed version of the CSV files and attempted to make it work, but to no avail. Luckily we were left with some data frames that could accurately illustrate the financial profile of each county and we can see them right next to each other. 


Last on my to-do list was to acquire police employment data from the Criminal Justice Information Services Data Archives. Luckily this was in the form of a CSV file that was downloaded from their archives. This file contained every county in Colorado, and how many officers were employed there (total employees, active officers, and civilians that worked in the department.) I found that there was a large difference between the number of officers employed in each county, with Arapahoe County being almost double the amount of Boulder County. Then I remembered to compare the number of officers to their corresponding populations and found that the results had a slim difference of 0.04 officers per 1000 residents. 




Result summary:
Boulder arrests - 30 per 1000
Arapahoe arrests - 10 per 1000
Boulder Income - a high percentage of upper-class
Arapahoe income - a high percentage of middle-class
Boulder police - 0.33 per 1000
Arapahoe police - 0.37 per 1000 


While analyzing my findings, I notest that Boulder arrest rates are three times higher than Arapahoe arrest rates. To compare this to the police force per 1000 residents would be ridiculous because there is almost no difference between the two counties. This debunks my initial hypothesis with flying colors. Meaning that there must be a correlation between income and arrests right? By looking at the data we can see that there is a larger wage gap in Boulder County than there is in Arapahoe County. I can assume that this is a contributing factor to the large arrest rates, but to say that it is without a doubt the sole reason why there is such a high arrest rate would be ridiculous because the margins are so slim. In conclusion, I found that the incites I have uncovered have only raised more questions. And by looking at my results we can see that there is not enough evidence to point at a single factor that is responsible for the arrest rates in each County. I find this frustrating but it makes sense because I guess the US would be able to solve or predict crime a lot better if we could see a direct correlation to a specific population trait. 


If I had more time to dive deeper into the project, I guess I would look at geographic characteristics, like how many square miles in each county. And how many police occupy that space. Another thing I could look at is occupancy and job security, or look at the education statistics of the county population. On the ground level, I could compare laws and policies to see how strict or lenient the county is. The level of depth applied to this project could be infinite, but I bet I could eventually find a direct correlation to a county's arrest rates
 (or am I just being naive?)